KEP-2885: Beta Graduation Criteria for Field Validation (#3081)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/2885-server-side-unknown-field-validation/README.md

* Server should validate that no extra fields are present or invalid (e.g.
misspelled), nor are any fields duplicated (for json and yaml data).
* We must maintain compatibility with all existing clients, thus server side
unknown field validation should be opt-in.
* kubectl should provide the ability for a user to request server-side

>   validation.

Reviewer: I expected kubectl to default to server-side validation against servers that support it

Author: Modified the wording of this bullet, let me know what you think.

some of the fields (or a similar situation). We do not think it is worth
supporting this use case initially and will error if clients attempt to validate
schema server-side with protobuf data.
* Enhanced offline validation. Current client-side validation has been used as a
  form of offline validation to simply validate configs that have no intention
  of being actually applied to a server. Ideally users would have a supported

>   way to perform offline validation, but that is outside the scope of this KEP.

Reviewer 2: Not asking for a change here, but using the same yaml/json library client side would already be an improvement (even if it doesn't work with openapi support, it would at least detect duplicates for example?)

that server-side validation should either not be performed at all, provide
warnings for the presence of unknown/duplicate fields, or error out in the
presence of unknown/duplicate fields.

For beta, we propose modifying the kubectl `--validate` flag to enable users
to choose between client-side validation or server-side
validation (either strict or warning)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Future Work

Upon successfully providing kubectl access to server-side validation via the
`--validate` flag, an open question will remain as to the future of client
side validation.

While we would like kubectl to use server-side validation by default once it
is GA, the question remains whether client-side validation be optionally
available to kubectl users or completely deprecated.

Maintaining client-side validation indefinitely provides the benefit of
allowing users to validate their objects without needing access to a server.
On the other hand, the downside of continuing to maintain client-side
validation is that it uses openapiv2 which will be less actively supported
as openapiv3 becomes standard and will cause client-side validation to

> continue to diverge from server-side validation.

Reviewer 3: Are there any mechanisms available to address this (if not, what's the most obvious obstacle)?

Author: I've added a note about separate "out-of-tree" solutions for CS validation as pre-req for deprecating the existing CS validation, noting that OpenAPI v3 support for kubeval is one such solution that needs further investigation.

Does this answer your question?

CC @apelisse because I think you have better context on what specificially will break CS validation as openapiv3 progresses in adoption

> continue to diverge from server-side validation.

Reviewer 4: So what's the conclusion?
[Personally, I would like client-side validation to be deprecated and eventually completely replaced with server-side, but no matter what we should probably have some conclusion too what is our thinkng.]

Reviewer 3: I suppose that full removal would need its own KEP.

Reviewer 4: Sure - but let's say where we would like to head eventually.

Author: Added note about:
1. Separate KEP for CS validation deprecation
2. Alternate CS validation will be a pre-req for deprecation
3. kubeval is a potential candidate for that alternate validation.

Let me know if this is sufficient or if you think we need to do more to decide on what our future solution for CS validation will be now before we shoot for beta.

Reviewer: Commented in a few places, but I don't think we should add mechanisms to explicitly request client-side validation.

I would expect the `--validate` flag to be intent-based, to use server-side validation when available, and N releases after server-side field validation hits GA, to drop support for client-side validation.

Reviewer 4: > I would expect the --validate flag to be intent-based, to use server-side validation when available, and N releases after server-side field validation hits GA, to drop support for client-side validation.

+1 [that frames nicely what I was trying to say in my initial comment]

Author: Agreed. The kep now uses this language and I added a comment to explicitly spell out the "intent-based" nature of the `--validate` flag

Reviewer 2: I'm not usually a big fan of flags whose behavior depends on some hard-to-assess logic (in this case, looking at the existence of a query param defined in the openapi). I'd rather want the behavior to be strictly defined and unconditional, with a proper error when used incorrectly (rather than the query param being merely ignored).

The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We propose adding server-side schema validation, enabling the API server
to validate that objects received in the request body in POST, PUT, and
PATCH requests contain no unknown or duplicate fields.

We introduce a query parameter that enables the user/client to indicate
that server-side validation should either not be performed at all, provide
warnings for the presence of unknown/duplicate fields, or error out in the
presence of unknown/duplicate fields.

For beta, we propose modifying the kubectl `--validate` flag to enable users
to choose between client-side validation or server-side

> validation (either strict or warning)

Reviewer: I expected kubectl to default to server-side validation against servers that support it

Author: Updated.

PATCH requests contain no unknown or duplicate fields.

We introduce a query parameter that enables the user/client to indicate
that server-side validation should either not be performed at all, provide
warnings for the presence of unknown/duplicate fields, or error out in the
presence of unknown/duplicate fields.

For beta, we propose modifying the kubectl `--validate` flag to enable users
to choose between client-side validation or server-side
validation (either strict or warning), when server-side validation is supported
by the server (and default to strict server-side validation).

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Future Work

##### Deprecating Client Side Validation
Upon successfully providing kubectl access to server-side validation via the
`--validate` flag, an open question will remain as to the future of client
side validation.

While we would like kubectl to use server-side validation by default once it
is GA, the question remains whether client-side validation be optionally
available to kubectl users or completely deprecated.

Maintaining client-side validation indefinitely provides the benefit of

> allowing users to validate their objects without needing access to a server.

Reviewer: > allowing users to validate their objects without needing access to a server

That ability is not present today, since the first step of client-side validation is fetching the schema from the server. Given the problems with client-side validation, I don't think we should expand use of it.

Author: I want to loop in @KnVerey and @seans3 from sig-cli, because when I brought up replacing CS validation with SS validation in kubectl initial, they expressed concern around this use case if we were to wholesale replace CS validation with SS validation without offering a CS alternative.

Correct me if I'm explaining this wrong, but I think the concern is that if a user has the schema cached (or gets it from somewhere other than the server), being able to validate my configs is still useful even if I don't have access to the server anymore (and is currently possible with existing CS validation), and we would be removing this functionality by removing access to CS validation

Reviewer: client-side validation is known to be buggy, have false negatives, and (as exposed by kubectl) requires the schema which _usually_ requires server access. We *should* be removing it as soon as there's an equivalent server-side capability and we've passed the server/client skew window.

Reviewer: (I agree on communicating/coordinating with sig-cli, but the current state of client-side validation in kubectl is not one we should preserve any longer than we have to)

Author: here's the source conversation for context https://youtu.be/OP84E63N81M?t=2798

Author: updated based on discussion at https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C2GL57FJ4/p1641572498004900

Reviewer 5: Thanks for looping me in! FWIW after reading the conversation in Slack and reflecting on this further, I also agree with the intent-based flag values and the removal of the client-side implementation once the skew window has passed.

The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We propose adding server-side schema validation, enabling the API server
to validate that objects received in the request body in POST, PUT, and
PATCH requests contain no unknown or duplicate fields.

We introduce a query parameter that enables the user/client to indicate
that server-side validation should either not be performed at all, provide
warnings for the presence of unknown/duplicate fields, or error out in the
presence of unknown/duplicate fields.

For beta, we propose modifying the kubectl `--validate` flag to enable users
to choose between client-side validation or server-side
validation (either strict or warning), when server-side validation is supported

> by the server (and default to strict server-side validation).

Reviewer: adjust this based on the slack discussion... kubectl validate would *not* expose a choice between client and server-side validation

Author: done. I've also noted that the feature will be on by default in beta, which I think is the case (that all k8s feature gates go on by default in beta), but let me know if that is incorrect.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Future Work

##### Deprecating Client Side Validation
Upon successfully providing kubectl access to server-side validation via the
`--validate` flag, an open question will remain as to the future of client
side validation.

While we would like kubectl to use server-side validation by default once it

> is GA, the question remains whether client-side validation be optionally

Reviewer: not just in GA, in beta as well, correct?

Author: I have modified this to explain that server-side validation is default starting in beta for servers that support it. 

I've also tried to spell out what this means for CS validation (that it can't be used with servers that support SS validation, but is nonetheless, will still continue to be available in kubectl, for the situation where kubectl is not connected to a server supporting SS validation (i.e. and server with the flag disabled, an older server, or no server at all)).

The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We propose adding server-side schema validation, enabling the API server
to validate that objects received in the request body in POST, PUT, and
PATCH requests contain no unknown or duplicate fields.

We introduce a query parameter that enables the user/client to indicate
that server-side validation should either not be performed at all, provide
warnings for the presence of unknown/duplicate fields, or error out in the
presence of unknown/duplicate fields.

When server-side validation is enabled on the server (as will be the default
starting in beta), we propose modifying the kubectl `--validate` flag to
default to server-side strict validation and allow the user to choose between
strict, warn-only, or no validation.

> We propose documenting that client-side validation is deprecated and server-side

Reviewer 6: has @kubernetes/sig-cli-api-reviews had a look?

Author: Yea, we've been in discussion with @soltysh @KnVerey and @seans3 and I believe we've resolved all current blockers/objections. 

I took a look at the API review checklist and am not sure if there's anything else I need to do for cli api reviews specifically, but let me know if I'm missing anything.

validation will be used instead by default if available. We will fallback to
client-side validation in the mean time if kubectl does not connect to a server

> with server-side validation enabled (either because the server it is connected

Reviewer 6: how does the client know that the server does or does not have the featuregate set to true?

Reviewer: the `fieldValidation` parameter is only included in the published openapi (the same openapi already fetched in order to do client-side validation) if the feature is enabled

Author: We will read the OpenAPI published to the server (similar to what we do for the dry-run verifier https://github.com/kubernetes/cli-runtime/blob/cfe3fe3837db26e9afb75e9491348080a4f0ef23/pkg/resource/dry_run_verifier.go#L73:26)

I've added a not to the `kubectl flag` section of the design details

to is older or has the feature-gate disabled, or because kubectl is not
connected to any server at all).

When we fallback to client-side validation we will send a warning to let users
know that their request is being validated by the deprecated client-side
validation.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Future Work

##### Out-of-Tree Alternatives to Client Side Validation
Upon successfully providing kubectl access to server-side validation via the
`--validate` flag, an open question will remain as to the future of client
side validation.

Kubectl will use server-side validation by default starting in beta for servers
that have it enabled. If kubectl does not recognize a server with server-side
validation enabled, however, it will fall back to using client-side validation
with a deprecation warning.

Even though we feel deprecating client-side validation is justified due to the
inevitability of it always being less correct than server-side validation, we

> still acknowledge that their are benefits to giving users a way to validate

Reviewer 7: Nit: 
```suggestion
still acknowledge that there are benefits to giving users a way to validate
```

required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->
### Opt-in API Mechanism (Query Parameter)

There are a few ways we could allow a client to opt-in to server-side unknown
field validation, we believe the best option is to introduce a new query
parameter to indicate the level of field validation the server should perform,
such as `?fieldValidation=Strict`.

Primary arguments for using query parameter include:

> * Being able version them with the API version.

Reviewer: typo:
```suggestion
* Being able to version them with the API version.
```

that said, query parameters aren't actually easy to version, especially ones that apply generically to all create/update/patch operations like this one

Author: Deleted the line since it doesn't add much anyways.

object has any unknown or duplicate fields.

#### Kubectl Flag

For beta, we will modify the kubectl `--validate` flag from being a bool flag to
a string flag that accepts the following values:

* `server`: This sends a request with the fieldValidation param set to `Strict`
for strict server-side validation.
* `client`: This performs client-side validation in kubectl that breaks if it
encounters any validation errors before sending a request to the server. If no
client-side validation errors are found, the request sent to the server has
fieldValidation param set to `Ignore`. This will be the default behavior in beta
as it is identical to the current validation behavior pre-1.24
* `ignore`: This performs no client-side validation or server-side validation,
sending a request to the server with fieldValidation param set to `Ignore`.
* `warn`: This sends a request to the server with the fieldValidation param set
  to `Warn`. It performs server-side validation, but validation errors are
  exposed as warnings in the result header rather than failing the request. This
  will be the default once server-side validation goes GA.

> * `strict`: same behavior as `--validate=server`.

Reviewer 4: Why do we need it then?

Author: "Strict", "Warn", and "Ignore" are the semantics used by the fieldValidation query param and will be permanent.

"Server" and "Client" are transitionary semantics for now since we want to give the caller the ability to choose until client side validation is no longer an option. It makes sense to offer both "server" and "strict" for now so that the user sees the expected behavior regardless of which set of semantics they are using.

object has any unknown or duplicate fields.

#### Kubectl Flag

For beta, we will modify the kubectl `--validate` flag from being a bool flag to
a string flag that accepts the following values:

* `server`: This sends a request with the fieldValidation param set to `Strict`
for strict server-side validation.
* `client`: This performs client-side validation in kubectl that breaks if it
encounters any validation errors before sending a request to the server. If no
client-side validation errors are found, the request sent to the server has
fieldValidation param set to `Ignore`. This will be the default behavior in beta
as it is identical to the current validation behavior pre-1.24
* `ignore`: This performs no client-side validation or server-side validation,
sending a request to the server with fieldValidation param set to `Ignore`.
* `warn`: This sends a request to the server with the fieldValidation param set
  to `Warn`. It performs server-side validation, but validation errors are
  exposed as warnings in the result header rather than failing the request. This
  will be the default once server-side validation goes GA.
* `strict`: same behavior as `--validate=server`.

> * `true`: This is the same as `--validate=client`, but throws a warning along

Reviewer: I expected `--validate=true` to default to strict server-side validation against servers that advertise support for it in their openapi doc

Author: I wasn't sure if changing the behavior of the "true" value to now mean server-side was less disruptive to users than keeping it as is (client-side) but warning that "true/false" semantics are being replaced with "strict/warn/ignore" for server-side.

I don't feel too strongly either way, so I've modified it as you've suggested to make `--validate=true` mean strict server-side validation.

See my related comment below on deprecating "true/false".

  the lines of "`--validate=true` is being deprecated, use `--validate=client`
  instead". This is also the default behavior if `--validate` flag is passed

>   withouth a value set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  without a value set.
```

Author: done

object has any unknown or duplicate fields.

#### Kubectl Flag

For beta, we will modify the kubectl `--validate` flag from being a bool flag to
a string flag that accepts the following values:

* `server`: This sends a request with the fieldValidation param set to `Strict`
for strict server-side validation.
* `client`: This performs client-side validation in kubectl that breaks if it
encounters any validation errors before sending a request to the server. If no
client-side validation errors are found, the request sent to the server has
fieldValidation param set to `Ignore`. This will be the default behavior in beta

> as it is identical to the current validation behavior pre-1.24.

Reviewer: given the problems with client-side validation, I actually don't want to **increase** the ability to specifically request it... keeping the flag intent-based (`--validate=true|false|strict|warn|ignore`) and using server-side validation when available makes more sense to me

Author: see comment below. I'm hesitant to remove the ability to explicitly request client-side validation on ss-validation enabled servers before discussing with sig-cli

object has any unknown or duplicate fields.

#### Kubectl Flag

For beta, we will modify the kubectl `--validate` flag from being a bool flag to
a string flag that accepts the following values:

* `true` or `strict`: If server-side validation is enabled on the server it sends
  a request with the fieldValidation param set to `Strict`, otherwise it falls

>   back to client-side validation. This is the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  back to client-side validation. The default remains `true`, as today
```

Author: done

* `false` or `ignore`: This performs no server-side validation or client-side validation,
sending a request to the server with fieldValidation param set to `Ignore` if
server-side validation is enabled.
* `warn`: This sends a request to the server with the fieldValidation param set
  to `Warn`. It performs server-side validation, but validation errors are
  exposed as warnings in the result header rather than failing the request. This

>   will be the default once server-side validation goes GA.

Reviewer: This will *not* be the default for kubectl, right? Since it's strict today it should continue to be strict.

Author: removed

object has any unknown or duplicate fields.

#### Kubectl Flag

For beta, we will modify the kubectl `--validate` flag from being a bool flag to
a string flag that accepts the following values:

> * `true` or `strict`: If server-side validation is enabled on the server it sends

Reviewer 2: The conditional behavior based on the servers ability sounds confusing to me. Also, what do you do on a "client-dry-run"? i.e. `kubectl create --dry-run=client --validate`? Does that automatically fall back to client-side validation? How do you explain that? "Why are the errors looking so different"?

Author: Added a note that we will treat `--dry-run=client` as not being connected to any server at-all and thus will trigger a fallback to CS validation

Reviewer: doesn't dry-run=client trigger local mode and prevent getting the schema from the server at all, and therefore do no validation?

Author: @apelisse do you know if there's some mechanism under the hood that using a cached schema or something. 

FWIW I can definitely see that validation _**is**_ being performed with `--dry-run=client` when running a simple experiment on a generic 1.23 cluster

Reviewer 2: Yes, client dry-run still asks the server for the openapi. It has pros and cons ...

-->
#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature gate
- Integration tests added for all relevant verbs (POST, PUT, and PATCH)

#### Beta

- kubectl validate flag offers ability to perform server-side validation
- All follow-ups from alpha are complete (see below)

##### Alpha Follow Ups

These are some tasks that were initially planned for alpha, but did not make it

> and should be addressed before beta is considered complete.

Reviewer: drop the lines/header describing the alpha → beta shift and just include them as beta criteria

Author: done

- [ ] endpoints handler unit testing of field validation
- [ ] customresource handler unit testing of field validation
- [ ] field validation integration tests check for exact match of strict errors

> - [ ] [sigs.k8s.io/yaml should

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is required for beta... doing this seems likely to require forking the underlying yaml library, which I'm not eager to do

Author: Fair enough, I've moved it to the "Future Work" section for now and added some more detail.

-->
#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature gate
- Integration tests added for all relevant verbs (POST, PUT, and PATCH)

#### Beta

- [  ]kubectl validate flag offers ability to perform server-side validation
- [ ] endpoints handler unit testing of field validation

> - [ ] customresource handler unit testing of field validation

Reviewer: I thought we already had these tests

Author: We have integration tests for each endpoint via [field_validation_test.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/test/integration/apiserver/field_validation_test.go) and we have unit test coverage of the various field validation algorithms we touched (i.e structural pruning and unstructured converter), but this is referring to testing just the handler behavior independently for requests with invalid fields (i.e. [apiserver_test.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/endpoints/apiserver_test.go) and [customresource_handler_test.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/apiextensions-apiserver/pkg/apiserver/customresource_handler_test.go).

Are these the tests you though we already have

Reviewer: yeah, that was what I was thinking of

> - [ ] field validation integration tests check for exact match of strict errors

Reviewer: what do you mean by exact match? exact match relative to existing client-side errors, or exact match of expected errors (instead of substring matches)?

Author: just exact match of expected errors, because right now we're just checking that the error from the server contains each expected error because strict errors are reported as one large combined error rather than individual errors like for warnings. 

See https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/test/integration/apiserver/field_validation_test.go#L540-L557

inert when the feature is disabled.

For example, unknown field path tracking in both the unstructured converter and
structural pruning algorithm affect performance when server-side field
validation is performed, but are tested to ensure that they are never invoked
when server side field validation is disabled.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

API servers rolled out with field validation enabled could start erroneously
failing requests if there are problems with how field validation is implemented.

Also, performance issues could slow down API server performance or memory usage
if extraneous validation is being invoked.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

A drastic deterioration in API server performance could indicate an issue with
the feature and a need to rollback (i.e. `apiserver_request_duration_seconds`).

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

No

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

> For beta we will be warning kubectl users that `--validate={true,false}` is

Reviewer: why do we need to deprecate --validate=true/false when we can make --validate=true use server-side validation on servers that support it automatically?

Author: That's fair. My thinking on the deprecation is that long term validation will be expressed in terms of "Strict", "Warn", and "Ignore". I guess there's no real reason to deprecate "true/false" other than that it might confuse people who expect the behavior of "--validate=true" to be the old client-side behavior. Removed the note about deprecating it.

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->
Mutating API calls that opt-in to validation will be slower.
Benchmarks of alpha changes indicate that performing validation results in

> ~2-5% slower request latency and ~4-8% more memory usage.

Reviewer 4: I'm glad to see that the numbers are actually smaller than initially provided (and the current ones actually better fit my intuition, which is great).

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->

> Mutating API calls that opt-in to validation will be slower.

Reviewer: clarify that this performance hit is limited to json/yaml requests, and that the majority of high-frequency requests made by system components use protobuf

Author: done

Benchmarks of alpha changes indicate that performing validation results in
~2-5% slower request latency and ~4-8% more memory usage.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

Non-negligible increase to RAM of kube-apiserver when server-side validation is

> heavily utilized.

Reviewer: 4-8% increase in mutating json/yaml requests is not nothing, but is also a much smaller percentage of overall resource usage... I think overall this is actually negligible

Author: done

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->
Mutating API calls that opt-in to validation will be slower.
Benchmarks of alpha changes indicate that performing validation results in
~2-5% slower request latency and ~4-8% more memory usage for json and yaml
requests.

Given that the majority of high-frequency requests made by system
components use protobuf, we expect a negligible increase in overall resource
usage.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

Non-negligible increase to RAM of kube-apiserver when server-side validation is
heavily utilized.

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

Same as without the feature

###### What are other known failure modes?

N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

> Opt out of server-side validation if the performance impact of it is not

Reviewer 6: this requires finding all clients.  Do you mean setting the featuregate to false?

Author: yep. changed

-->

## Alternatives

> ### Content-Type Header

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### HTTP header mechanism
```
One option is to send Content-Type; the other is to send `X-Kubernetes-Validation`.

Author: done
